---
title: Undocumented Features
description: Features and functions supported in expressions which weren't publicly documented.
---

Available functions and operators were not thoroughly documented in any case except for a few in the official preset
authoring guide. Most functions added in later Milkdrop releases were sometimes mentioned in the WinAmp forums, often
without proper documentation.

There are still a few features within the expression parser which were never mentioned anywhere. Reverse-engineering the
code and reimplementing those features in projectM's own expression parser enabled documentation of these.

## Constants

Starting with a `$`, it is possible to use some special values instead of raw numbers in expressions. All constants (
except for the character in the ordinal constant) are case-insensitive.

A few frequently used mathematical constants are defined:

- `$PI`: Equals `3.141592653589793`
- `$E`: Equals `2.71828183`
- `$PHI`: Equals `1.61803399`

### Hexadecimal Values

Hexadecimal constants start with `$X`, immediately followed by the hexadecimal numbers.

Examples:

- `$XFF` converts to `255`.
- `$x7b7b7b` converts to `8092539`

### Character (Ordinal) Values

Constants can also convert a single character into its ordinal (ASCII) value using the form `$'c'`, where `c` is the
character to convert.

Examples:

- `$'a'` converts to `97`.
- `$'''` converts to `39`.

## Internal Functions and Aliases

The following functions are defined internally, some being aliases to the above functions, others being used as actual
implementations of operators. Depending on the operator being unary or binary, each function has one or two parameters.

- `_aboeq(a, b)` => Operator `>=`, argument `a` is assigned with the result
- `_above(a, b)` => Operator `>`
- `_add(a, b)` => Operator `+`
- `_addop(a, b)` => Operator `+=`, argument `a` is assigned with the result
- `_and(a, b)` => Operator `&&`
- `_andop(a, b)` => Operator `&=`, argument `a` is assigned with the result
- `_beleq(a, b)` => Operator `<=`
- `_below(a, b)` => Operator `<`
- `_div(a, b)` => Operator `/`
- `_divop(a, b)` => Operator `/=`, argument `a` is assigned with the result
- `_equal(a, b)` => Operator `==`
- `_gmem(a)` => Alias for `gmegabuf`
- `_if(a, b, c)` => Operator `?:` and alias for `if`
- `_mem(a)` => Alias for `megabuf`
- `_mod(a, b)` => Operator `%`
- `_modop(a, b)` => Operator `%=`, argument `a` is assigned with the result
- `_mul(a, b)` => Operator `*`
- `_mulop(a, b)` => Operator `*=`, argument `a` is assigned with the result
- `_neg(a)` => Negation operator `-`
- `_not(a)` => Operator `!`
- `_noteq(a, b)` => Operator `!=`
- `_or(a, b)` => Operator `||`
- `_orop(a, b)` => Operator `|=`, argument `a` is assigned with the result
- `_powop(a, b)` => Operator `^=`, argument `a` is assigned with the result
- `_set(a, b)` => Operator `=`, alias for `assign`, argument `a` is assigned with the result
- `_sub(a, b)` => Operator `-`
- `_subop(a, b)` => Operator `-=`, argument `a` is assigned with the result
